Unlike Foucault, Gilles Deleuze (1992: 5), argues that the new social scriptwriting resides in the inversion of the logic of omnipresent panopticism of social disciplining by the logic of omnipresent mechanism of social control, on the inversion of disciplinary society with society of control.
Standardised organisational routines of the (modernist-enlightenment) factories are transposed into the meta-stable organisational schemes of the (post-modernist) corporation, individuals into dividuals (us as a separate I are no longer indivisible and selfidentical), and the slogans of mass affirmation or resistance into electronic passwords of a dismantled individual.
The point is that the emphasis has been shifted from trailing/locating people and information in different categories of flows, to codes, enabling the access of specific subjects to specific spaces/zones.
Specific information about us can be recombined without our review, control or participation, challenging any discussion of individual as an irreducible and autonomous agency (Williams 2005).
In light of that, Gilles Deleuze i Félix Guattari (2005 [1980]) inaugurate the descriptor/concept of assemblage as an analytical instrument in understanding of entities, underpinned by the ontological grammar of multiplicity, polyvalence, “molecularity” and multidimensionality of the heterogeneous, non-finalized, open and processual interaction of diverse material units and semiotic elements bound in contingent, palliative, “inorganic”, heteronymous and incoherent wholes, hyper-mutable forms of form and structure, with different actors and resources, or meaningful, rhetorical or symbolic expressions (Bonta and Protevi 2006; DeLanda 2006; Bennett 2010; Anderson and McFarlane 2011; Anderson et al.
2012).
So, unlike Foucaultʼs concepts of regimes, apparatuses/diapositives or governmental technology, an assemblage is an articulating/emerging, rather than articulated/emerged formation.
Consequently, if the focus is on border assemblage, as noted by Christophe Sohn (2015: 6; 2016: 185), it is a combination of the following material and non- material components (with possibility of their overlapping) and not solely along the demarcation lines but in all locales where border practices are performed and materialise: physical and transport infrastrucures; different resources; policing procedures and tools; surveillance technologies; narratives on border taxonomies and categorisations; specific legislations defining a border regime; ceremonies and rituals expressing solidarity and legitimacy; and symbols constitutive of a territorial identity.
Or even more currently, the deployment of digital/biometric border technologies (e-Passports, “Smart Borders”, Radio Frequency Identification etc.) and border drones suggests two interesting and important issues.
By not only validating but also constituting someoneʼs identity, border registration/recording by use of biometric technology becomes a precondition of belonging to a specific society or lifestyle, human bodies become mobile “organic transmitters“ of multiply coded borders, a nontransparent identity algorhithms of decomposing/ recomposing, depending on the particular data bases spread across different spatial points (Amoore 2006; Popescu 2012: 108-120, 2015, 2017: 458-471).
Drones, again, are systems that considerably increase operative flexibility of surveillance, making it fluid, more mobile and particularly oriented which, among other, leads to the re-formulation of border space by control/monitoring no longer restricted to borders and borderlands but extended to the totality of a territory/society (Pedrozo 2017).
Generally, this constellation has four important outcomes (Jones et al.
2017: 4-5): (1) mobile and portable borders render the whole planetary space conducive to potential bordering processes; (2) there is an increase in border instances, since people encounter different borders at different locations/levels/ sub-levels; (3) the character of individual encounter with borders has been changed, since it is mediated by various digital devices and led/controlled by private actors; and (4) border control has become extremely, digitally microcoded, continuous and referred to the human body.
Moreover, Deleuze and Guattari (2000 [1972]), 2005 [1980]) argue that the act of leaving a specific territory/assemblage that makes them visible and recognizable, is followed by the act of creating another territory/assemblage: permanent de-territorializing/decoding is followed by permanent reterritorializing/re-coding, and this simultaneously destabilizes the implied inertia of territory and initiates the mobility of the instance of territorializing/coding, that predominantly refers to the temporal identity (re)affirmation and internal relational-institutional equilibrium of territory/assemblage.
In this manner, despite the territorial institutionalisation and permanence of specific types of practices, borders can be perceived as something that is in a state a perpetual creation, in unfinalised emergence or never-ending morphogenesis.
In so doing, Deleuze and Guattari insist that the primacy of metaphor over the materiality of borders must be rejected, their understanding of space is resolutely material (Woodward and Jones 2005: 237-238).
In short, questioning what borders are by their functions, roles and characteristics, should be overlooked and the focus should be on the tracing and retracing of uneven ephemeral modes of connection, interconnection, disconnection and reconnection of different practices within the iterative dynamics of their emergence.
Borders are, on the one hand, historically contingent assemblages that, through interaction with other entities, have temporarily stabilised particular features, but, on the other, also capacities, an irreducible ensemble of potentials, a “space of possibilities“ that can never be completely predicted in the sense of new symbolic and other resources that borders may possess or produce (DeLand 2006: 28-29).
What borders are can be expanded or narrowed, but also completely changed.
If we focus on power, then the assemblage may refer neiter to the singular / monolithic/centralised governing power, nor to the evenly/uniquely balanced and distributed power, but to an excentric/transormative/instrumental/plural apprehension of power: it is therefore not “power over“ actors, but “power to“, or the actorsʼ potentials to influence or realise specific outcomes (Anderson and McFarlane 2011: 125; Sohn 2015: 8).
In this vein, the existencce of convergent/ divergent meanings attached to borders by different actors, should not only be considered by their role or funcion, or by belonging to some compact social formation (class/political entity, ethnicity, confession/denomination or gender), but by position/capacities, outside the institutionalised hierarchy, in the competitive field of cooperation/confrontation for semantic/semiotic/symbolic resources.
Thus, a border dispute may be a site of both contestation and affirmation by a single actor, just as an alliance of actors with completely different views on the same border issue is possible, while both these situations may be part of a single border assemblage (e.g.
a whole array of border issues marking the relations among the Southeast Balkan states).
Using the renaissance syntagm fabrica mundi, or the fabrication of worlds, Sandro Mezzadra i Brett Neilson (2012: 64-67; 2013: 18, 30, 36), ontologically analyse the world created by borders, that are less an object of their research and more their epistemological stance/method (of cognition of the world but also for action).
They are simultaneously a method of capital, site of resistance/ confrontation with the currently reformulated relations of deprivation/exploitation, but also an attempt to open the space for multiple imaginations and alternative platforms of production of the world (its partitions, arrangements and appropriations).
It is an attempt to find new paradigms that depart from the elaboration of borders based on separate case studies with clear situational outlines, as a metaphor of wall and leitmotif of security, since they obscure borders as the connecting tissue of accumulation and exploatation (Kurtz 2013).
Differentially inclusive borders, whose proliferation represents the specificum of contemporary globalisation, do more than generate a mere distinction to outer and inner, they selectively percolate, channel and reorient migrant movement not only towards the economic-market sphere, but also toward exploitative relations.
In that sense, they abberate from the classical concept in which they predominantly function for the sake of exclusion and become forms of hierarchical/differentiated/ selective inclusion.
Border conflicts and migrants become the central protagonists of the degrading world matrix that enables the booming of capitalism and cyclical crises, while common social practices and policies characterising them cannot be derived from the ideas of borderless world and just borders, so they must be used on all scales: from local, through regional to the global level (Mezzadra and Neilson 2013: 59, 281).
Such conceptual perspective treats borders, quite reasonably in our view, as a cardinal notion for the decoding of global processes, but also for the understanding of the composition of contemporary capitalist society.
Consequently, borders as a method of capital can also be perceived as a method for a spatial resistance to capital (Brambilla 2015b)..
